Building your Resume with Open Source

In this article, I'll share my technique for leveraging open
source contributions to stand out as a great candidate for my desired job
in the technology field. 

No goal can be accomplished without first being set. Before jumping into a new
commitment or spending the evening overhauling your resume, it pays to clearly
define the traits of the job you're seeking. Your resume is a piece of
persuasive writing, so you have to know your audience for it to reach its full
potential. Your resume's audience is anyone with the need for your skills and
the budget to hire you. When editing, read your resume while imagining what
it's like to be in their position. Do you look like a candidate that you would
hire? 

I personally find it helpful to make a list of the key traits that the
ideal candidate for my target job diplays. I gather this list from a
combination of personal experience, reading job postings, and asking
colleagues in similar roles. LinkedIn and conferences are great places to find
people happy to offer this sort of advice. Many people enjoy talking about
themselves, and inviting them to tell part of their own story in order to help
expand your knowledge makes everyone feel good. As you talk to others about
their career paths, you'll gain insights not only into what gives people the
type of career you want, but also into which traits or behaviors correspond to
ending up in situations you'd rather avoid! 

For example, the list of key traits for a junior role might look like:

Technical: 
    * Experience with CI, Jenkins preferred
    * Strong scripting background in Python & Ruby
    * Familiarity with Eclipse the IDE
    * Basic Git and Bash
Personal: 
    * Self-directed learner
    * Clear communication and documentation skills
    * Experience working on a multi-person development team ("team player")
    * Familiarity with issue tracker workflow

Apply Anyway
------------

Remember, you don't have to meet every single criterion listed in a job description
to get an interview. 

[TODO: link that research about how people apply with only ~80% of qualifications]

The job description describes whoever left the role, and if
you start out knowing everything, you've likely signed yourself up for a few
years that don't challenge or expand your skill set. If you're nervous about
missing a particular technology on the list, do some research into it to
see whether comparable skills from another experience would apply. For
example, someone who's never used Jenkins might still understand the
principles of continuous integration testing from working on a project that
uses BuildBot or TravisCI. 

If you're applying to a larger company, they probably have an entire
department and comprehensive screening process to make sure they don't hire
any candidate unable to succeed in a role. That means it's your job to apply,
and their job to decide whether to reject you. Don't prematurely reject
yourself from the job by refusing to apply. 

Now you have an idea of what job you want, and what skills you'll need to
impress your interviewers. The next steps to take will vary
based on how much experience you've already got.

Tailoring existing involvement
------------------------------

Start by making a list of all the projects you've been involved with in the
past few years. One way to get a quick list of things you've worked on lately
is to navigate to the 'repositories' tab of your GitHub profile, and filter
the list by clicking on 'Forks'. Additionally, look down your Organizations
list at https://github.com/settings/organizations for places you might have
been engaging in leadership roles. 

If you have an existing resume, make sure each item of experience from it is
on the list as well. 

Consider any IRC channel where you have special permissions as a potential
leadership experience. Check your Meetup and Eventbrite accounts and add any
events that you organize or volunteer at to your list. Skim your calendar for
the past year and note any volunteering, mentoring, or public speaking
engagements. 

Now for the hard part: Map the list of skills onto the list of experiences. I
like to assign a letter or number to each trait needed for the job, then mark
the same symbol next to every piece of experience or involvement where you
demonstrated the trait. When in doubt, claim it anyway -- your problem is more
likely a reluctance to brag than actual incompetence. 

This is the point in the process at which resume writers are often fettered by
reluctance to risk overselling their own skills. It often helps to re-frame
the question as "Did someone who organized a meetup show leadership and
planning skills?" rather than "Did *I* personally show these skills when I
organized that meetup?".

If you've been suficiently thorough at figuring out where your free time has
gone for the past year or two and you code a lot, you might now be facing a
surprising problem: Too many items to fit on a single-page resume! If anything
on your list of experiences didn't demonstrate any of the skills you're trying
to showcase, cross it off. If an item demonstrates few skills and you don't
have any stories that you enjoy telling about it, cross it off. If this abridged
list of things you've done still won't fit in the format of a resume,
prioritize the experiences from which you gained either a story that you're
comfortable telling which showcases a desired skill, or extensive experience
with a desired technology.  

At this point, it should be obvious if you need a better piece of experience
to hone a particular skill. Consider using an issue aggregator like
openhatch.com to find an open source project where you build and practice your
skills with the tool or technology that you're missing. 

Make your Resume Beautiful
--------------------------

A resume's beauty comes from conciseness, clarity, and layout. Each piece of
experience should be accompanied by enough information for a reader to
immediately know why you included it, but not more. Each type of information
should be formatted consistently through the document -- it's distracting to
have some dates italicized or right-aligned and others not. 

Typeset your resume using a tool that makes these goals easy to achieve. I
enjoy using LaTeX, since its macro system makes visual consistency easy and
most interviewers recognize it immediately. Your tool of choice might be
LibreOffice Writer or HTML, depending on your skills and how you want to
distribute your resume. 

Remember that a digitally submitted resume might be scanned for keywords, so
it can help to use the same acronyms as the job posting when describing your
experiences. To make your resume easy for your interviewer to use, place the
most important information first. 

Coders often struggle to quantify balance and layout when typesetting a
document. My favorite technique for stepping back and assessing whether my
document's whitespace is in the right place is to fullscreen the PDF or print
it out, then look at it in a mirror. If you're using LibreOffice Writer, save
a copy of your resume then change the font to that of a language you can't
read. Both of these techniques forcibly pull you out of reading the content,
and allow you to see the overall layout of the document in a new light. They
take you from a "That sentence is poorly worded!" critique to noticing things
like "It looks funny to have only a single word on that line". 

Finally, double check that your resume displays correctly in the media where
it will be seen. If you're distributing it as a web page, test it at different
screen widths in multiple browsers. If it's a PDF, open it on your phone or a
friend's computer to make sure all the fonts it needs are available. 

Next Steps
----------

Finally, don't let the content that you worked so hard on for your resume go
to waste! Mirror it to your LinkedIn account, complete with the buzzwords from
the job posting, and don't be surprised if recruiters start reaching out to
you. Even if the jobs they're describing aren't a good fit right now, you can
leverage their time and interest to get feedback on what's working well about
your resume and what isn't. 
